Homework: QuickWrite about Context

(Example for Teacher Reference)

Today you learned about the context of the Harlem Renaissance with the Building Background Knowledge protocol. You explored the image on the cover of *The Crisis* magazine, articles, and political cartoons about the Great Migration, Jim Crow laws, and racial violence against black Americans. QuickWrite a paragraph to explain the social and political context of the Harlem Renaissance and how this context may have influenced the writers and artists at the time. (RI.7.1, RI.7.2)

Answers will vary, but may include: From the Building Background Knowledge texts, we learned that there were many social and political factors that contributed to the Harlem Renaissance. The 13th–15th Amendments to the US Constitution freed black people, made every person born in the United States a citizen, and allowed black men the right to vote. But mostly in the South, whites did not want black people to have rights or power, so they passed laws and practiced violent terrorism to keep black people segregated in public places and take away their rights. In response, many black Americans moved north to escape the intense racism of the South and find work. There were fewer Jim Crow laws in the North, but black people were still segregated into neighborhoods, such as Harlem in New York City. Cities like New York already were cultural centers with museums, publishers, and music venues. So black artists began creating. Black artists also fought for equal rights for black Americans. In summary, the Great Migration increased the number of black people living in cultural hubs in the North. Still, oppression, like Jim Crow laws, and violent terrorism inspired black artists to focus on justice in and outside their artistic work.
