Painted Essay® Model: “Peuchen”

(Example for Teacher Reference)

**Prompt:** What about your monster from folklore of Latin American have you kept the same and what have you modernized in the new scene you have written for *Summer of the Mariposas*? Why?

**Peuchen**

Stories written today often use modernized elements of folklore tales because those elements are still meaningful today. For example, in the case of *Summer of the Mariposas*, many characters are from folklore of Latin America. A flying, bloodsucking snake from Mapuche and Chilote mythology is a strong rival for any story. The Peuchen is such a creature. It can fly and suck blood. It can instantly shapeshift to change the form it takes. The Peuchen also hypnotizes its victims in order to suck their blood. It can only be defeated by a machi, which is a Mapuche Medicine Woman. In the new scene I have written for *Summer of the Mariposas* modernizing the Peuchen, I have kept many characteristics of the original monster so that it is recognizable, but I have modernized the tale by writing in two Peuchens, a brother and sister, to illustrate the theme that things are not always as they appear.

In some ways the two depictions are similar. Like the original character, the Peuchen in my new scene can also shapeshift. It shows itself to Odilia as someone familiar in order to gain her trust. When the Peuchen has to fight her brother to save the sisters, she instantly transforms into the traditional flying snake of the original story. As with the original, the gaze of the Peuchen in the new scene also has an impact on the victim who looks at it. The original character is described as being able to “drain them dry of their blood.” In my new scene, the first Peuchen Odilia meets describes how she has already fed on the blood of a sheep. Therefore, the girls are not in danger. The Peuchen tells Odilia. Keeping many of the physical characteristics ensures the monster from Latin American folklore is still recognizable in the new scene.

I have also modernized the monster by having two Peuchens, a brother and sister. This is because I have a new purpose for writing about the monster. The monsters are different from each other. Even though they look the same, each one has different ideas about what they want from Odilia and her sisters. The female Peuchen wants to help the girls. She presents herself as a familiar woman in order to gain their trust. She wants the sisters to follow her out of danger. In contrast, her brother wants to feed on the blood of the girls. He says this to his sister. Odilia is surprised and puzzled that they are different from each other. They look the same, but they do not act the same. Having two “monsters” in the story illustrates the theme that things are not always as they appear. A species—or people—may share the same physical characteristics. However, their individual behavior and personalities can be quite different. Even though something can look scary and like a “monster,” it doesn’t mean that is the case.

I have kept many of the physical characteristics of the original Peuchen monster in the new scene the same. This is to make sure it is recognizable as the character from Latin American folklore. At the same time, I have modernized the monster for a new purpose. This illustrates the theme that things are not always as they appear. Stories written today often contain modernized elements of folklore stories. This is because those elements are still meaningful and relevant today. My new version of the monster can help us see that we live in a society of individuals from many different cultures and ethnic backgrounds, and we don’t all look the same. Instead of judging people negatively by their appearance, we should celebrate this diversity. We should learn what people are really like. Hopefully readers will also understand that just because someone or something looks different, it doesn’t mean they are bad or scary.

Sources:

Bane, T. *Encyclopedia of Beasts and Monsters in Myth, Legend and Folklore*. McFarland and Company, Inc. Jefferson, NC, 2016.

Hellman, R., and D. Hall. *Vampire Legends and Myths*. The Rosen Publishing Group, New York, NY, 2012.
