Language Dive: “Psychological Effects of  
Camp,” Paragraph 14 Sentence Chunk Chart

(For Teacher Reference)

**Sentence**

Today, years after the successful redress effort, multiple generations of Japanese Americans **remain watchful of policies and prejudices that unjustly target other groups**. (from “Psychological Effects of Camp” by *Densho Encyclopedia* contributors)

Launch

Focus student attention on nouns and relative clauses using blue and yellow markers (blue = nouns; yellow = relative clauses functioning as adjectives) to underline them. One purpose of this Language Dive is to reinforce how relative clauses are used to describe nouns and noun phrases.

**Key**

Yellow

Blue

Today, years after the successful redress effort,

Deconstruct

- **redress effort**

“What do you know about the redress effort?” (Responses will vary but should include that the redress effort refers to the Redress Movement, an effort by the US government to make up for the suffering caused to Japanese Americans during internment. \[noun phrase\])

- **, years after the successful redress effort,**

“Why do you think the writer used commas before and after the phrase years after the successful redress effort?” (To indicate a pause before important, but nonessential information. The pause generated by the commas helps to emphasize this information for the reader. Meanwhile, it also separates the information from the rest of the sentence because it is not absolutely necessary for understanding the idea being presented. \[adverb phrase\])

- Students can discuss whether or not they agree that the redress effort was successful.

multiple generations of Japanese Americans

Deconstruct

- multiple

“Can you figure out what multiple means?” (Multiple means more than two and usually refers to something that increases in parts. \[noun phrase\])

“Who is included in multiple generations of Japanese Americans?” (Multiple generations refers to those incarcerated in Japanese American internment camps and all of the people born into Japanese American families since Japanese American internment in the 1940s. \[noun phrase\])

“How do you think Japanese American internment might affect multiple generations of Japanese Americans today, years later?” (Responses will vary. Encourage and acknowledge all replies.)

- Students can draw a family tree to show multiple generations of the Wakatsuki family. Students may have difficulty remembering the names of some of the individuals in the text, but this sketch should generally convey the three generations that appear in *Farewell to Manzanar*: Papa and Mama, Jeanne and her siblings, and Jeanne’s children.

remain watchful of policies and prejudices that unjustly target other groups.

Deconstruct (Focus Structure)

- **that unjustly target other groups.**

- Underline that unjustly target other groups in yellow, and invite students to do the same on their note-catchers.

“Which noun phrase does the relative clause that unjustly target other groups describe?” (It describes policies and prejudices. \[relative clause\])

- Underline policies and prejudices in blue, and invite students to do the same on their note-catchers.

- As needed, remind students that relative clauses are descriptive clauses that give us more information about the noun or noun phrase that comes before them. A clause has a subject and a verb. Most relative clauses begin with **that** or **which**.

- **  
  policies and prejudices**

“Can you figure out what policies and prejudices are?” (Policies refer to formal laws or practices by government or other institutions. Prejudices are attitudes and judgements that are not based on reason or actual experience. \[noun + conjunction + noun = noun phrase\])

- As time allows, invite students to verify the meanings of **policies** and **prejudices** using a dictionary.

“So what do you think policies and prejudices that unjustly target other groups refers to?” (Responses will vary. Encourage and acknowledge all replies. Help students to understand that this likely refers to laws and perspectives that discriminate against people based on things like ethnicity, race, skin color, sex, gender, or sexual orientation.)

- **remain watchful**

“What’s another way to say remain watchful in your own words?” (Responses will vary but may include the following: to stay aware of, to pay attention to, to keep an eye on, and to stay woke. \[verb + adjective\])

“Why do you think Japanese Americans would pay attention to policies and prejudices that unjustly target other groups?” (Responses will vary. Encourage and acknowledge all replies, but look for students to identify that because of the history of discrimination against Japanese Americans and Japanese American internment during World War II, they likely have deep empathy for others who are being treated unjustly and may relate to their experience.)

- **Students can use Conversation Cues as they discuss. To provide heavier support, display a suggested sequence, such as the one below:**

- Goal 1: Let’s take time to think and write or sketch.

- Goal 1: Can you give an example?

- Goal 2: Who can repeat what they said?

- Goal 4: Who can explain why they came up with that response?

- Students can consider and share examples of other policies and prejudices that they themselves want to remain watchful of that unjustly target other groups.

Practice (Focus Structure)

- Students can use the sentence frame to discuss the types of books they are interested in reading.

> “Today, after reading many different texts this year, I remain interested in books \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
>
> \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.”

relative clause

> (**that** + subject +verb + \[object\] = relative clause)
>
> (Today, after reading many different texts this year, I remain interested in books  
> <u>that teach me about science</u>.)  Step 4

relative clause

- To provide lighter support: “Can we divide this sentence into two or more sentences? What do we have to remove or change?”

<!-- -->

- To provide heavier support: Invite students to discuss the meaning of the sentence in home-language groups. Add the nouns in students’ home languages to the Parts of Speech anchor chart.

<!-- -->

- 

Today, years after the successful redress effort, multiple generations of Japanese Americans remain watchful of policies and prejudices that unjustly target other groups.

Reconstruct

- Ask:

“How does the meaning of the sentence change if we replace that with which in the relative clause that unjustly target other groups?” (If we replace that with which, the information in the relative clause becomes extra or optional for understanding the noun clause it modifies \[policies and prejudices\]. The writers have used that at the beginning of this relative clause because this information is necessary to <u>define</u> the specific policies and prejudices that Japanese Americans remain watchful of. Using which adds description, but not definition.)

- <span class="mark">  
  </span>Cover the relative clause beginning with **that** with your hand.

“What if we remove this relative clause from the sentence?” (It changes the meaning. We no longer know which specific policies and prejudices Japanese Americans are remaining watchful of, which is essential information for understanding the idea presented in this sentence.)

“How does this sentence help you to understand a central idea in the article?” (It tells us about one of the three main effects of Japanese American internment and explains how Japanese Americans are impacted by the experience today.)

“How does this sentence add to your understanding of the lessons that we can take from Japanese American internment?” (It gives us information about how Japanese Americans, despite their terrible struggle, are drawing strength from their identities and communities to help others who are struggling or suffering \[or who might end up struggling and suffering\] because of fear and prejudice.)

“Now what do you think is the meaning of this sentence?” (Responses will vary.)

“How does the Language Dive add to your understanding of the guiding question:  
What are the main lessons that can be learned from Japanese American internment?” (Responses will vary.)

Practice (Sentence)

- Students can discuss the lessons from Japanese American internment today.

> “Today, years after Japanese American internment, we have lessons from Japanese American
>
> internment \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.”

relative clause

> (Today, years after Japanese American internment, we have lessons from Japanese American internment <u>that remind us to treat people with dignity and respect</u>.)  Step 4

- To provide lighter support: “What if we divide this sentence into two or more sentences? What do we have to remove or change?”

- To provide heavier support: Invite students to review habits of character to help them complete the sentence appropriately.

Language Chunk Wall Suggestions

- Language to talk about time (e.g., prepositions): **<u>Today, years after the successful redress effort,</u>**

- Nouns and noun phrases and clauses (people, places, things, ideas): **<u>multiple generations of Japanese Americans</u>**

- Adjectives and adjectival phrases and clauses (describing nouns): **remain watchful of policies and prejudices <u>that unjustly target other groups.</u>**
