Model Literary Analysis Essay: Relationship of Structure to Meaning

RL.8.2, RL.8.5, W.8.2, W.8.4, W.8.5, W.8.10

**Name:** **Date:**

**Prompt:** Write an essay in which you compare the theme of *Summer of the Mariposas* and “The Blind Men and the Elephant” and analyze how the differing structures contribute to that theme.

In our lives, we often encounter ideas, people, or situations that are different in some way from what we have experienced before. We might react differently to this. Sometimes, people may take that new idea and learn or grow from it. Other times, people may find it hard to accept the new idea. They might even refuse to consider it. Two texts that we have read, *Summer of the Mariposas* and “The Blind Men and the Elephant” explore this topic of encountering new ideas or people. Each comes to a different theme about the topic, and each uses a different structure to make that theme clear to the reader.

The novel *Summer of the Mariposas* explores the concept of new people and things and new ways of thinking about them. The main character, Odilia, is on a journey in several ways. One character she continues to encounter is the mythological heroine, La Llorona. Odilia has always been taught that La Llorona killed her own children many years before. She is now condemned as a ghost to roam the world searching for them. Over the course of the story, Odilia keeps encountering La Llorona. She realizes that what she thought was true of La Llorona is not true. By the end of the story, in fact, Odilia comes to realize that La Llorona is a suffering but loving figure who has been helping Odilia and her sisters all along the way. She is now transformed into a “radiant” young mother who will take her place among the stars (50). This theme of *Summer of the Mariposas* is that people and ideas are not always what they appear, but that it is possible to uncover the truth and learn something new.

The poem “The Blind Men and the Elephant” also explores the concept of encountering new people and things, and new ways of thinking about them. The poem comes from an ancient Hindu tale. In the poem, six blind wise men encounter a new creature, the elephant. None of them have ever encountered one before. Each of them touches only a part of the elephant and is instantly sure about what the elephant is like. None of the blind wise men are willing to think about the elephant in a new way. In contrast to *Summer of the Mariposas*, the theme of “The Blind Men and the Elephant” is that people, ideas, and things are not always what they appear, and that it is possible to ignore the truth and not learn anything.

To make sure that readers understand the message of a text, the writer uses an effective structure. In these two texts, the writers use different structures to build towards understanding the theme. *Summer of the Mariposas* uses a chronological plot structure. From the very beginning of the story, Odilia and her sisters go through a series of events and obstacles on their journey. They repeatedly encounter La Llorona. Early in the story, La Llorona is telling the girls that she “is not here to harm” them, and that she does not snatch children (50). Odilia knows how strange it is to be talking to a ghost, but she continues to talk with La Llorona and listen to her. After several more encounters, Odilia continues to learn that what she was taught about La Llorona is not actually true. By the end of the story, Odilia gives La Llorona flowers, and she is now transformed from a tired and middle-aged figure to “radiant and alive” (323). Odilia realizes that this is a new world, that La Llorona is no longer what she seemed. The plot structure of several encounters has made this theme clear.

In contrast, “The Blind Men and the Elephant” uses a different structure. The poem is divided into stanzas. There is one stanza for each blind wise man. Each wise man touches a different part of the elephant, and each one comes to a wrong conclusion about what an elephant is like. One blind wise man touches the strange elephant’s side and is certain that the elephant is “like a wall” (line 12). The next touches the strange elephant’s trunk, and believes that the elephant is like a spear. The structure of repeating what each wise man does, and comes to a wrong conclusion, helps make the theme of the poem clear. People, ideas, and things are not always what they seem, and it is possible to ignore the truth and learn nothing. (Perhaps the wise men are not so wise after all!)

Overall, these two texts work with the same topic that things are not always what they seem. However, they treat that topic with different themes and use different structures to make those themes clear to the reader. The intentional use of structure for message is an important way of making literature memorable for readers!
